[THEME MUSIC]
>>GREGG BRADEN: Hello,
my name is Gregg Braden.
And I'd like to welcome you to
this very special presentation
of "Missing Links,"
Simulation by Design,
Are We Living in
a Virtual Reality?
Well, in the last episode
of "Missing Links,"
we asked the question,
is it possible
that we're living in
a simulated reality?
In 2001, a scientist
at Oxford University
began the first
scientific investigation
designed to find an answer
to precisely this question.
So in this "Missing
Links" episode,
I'll share the results of that
investigation and the discovery
that has now opened
the floodgates
to serious scientific
consideration of us
living inside of an
ancient simulation.
The study itself is
going to intrigue you.
The results are
going to astound you.
Here's what I mean.
In 2001, a professor at
England's Oxford University
formalized the question
as to whether or not
we are living in an ancient
computerized simulation.
And he did it through a
paper that he published.
And the paper was actually
entitled, "Are You Living
in a Computer Simulation?"
The paper itself is complex.
And it identifies
three possibilities,
three possible scenarios, that
may be unfolding in our lives
right now and in our future.
And using a process of a
very complex algorithm,
with many variables that
represent the real world
as we know it today, he
concluded that at least one
of these scenarios is
actually happening right now.
Let's take a look
at this process.
And I'm going to spend a
little bit of time developing
this idea, because the
rest of this series
is based upon what
we're doing right now.
So it's important
that we understand
precisely what this
algorithm is telling us,
what the calculations
are telling us,
and what the conclusions
for the study
are really showing us
about our world today.
But before we get
to the paper itself,
there's a term that
I need to define.
The term is posthuman, a
posthuman civilization.
It's a term that Bostrom
uses throughout his paper,
throughout the algorithm.
And we're going to
refer to this term
throughout the rest
of this series,
so it's important that we
get it right right now.
Bostrom defines posthuman
as an advanced civilization,
like ours, that has transcended
the great challenges that we
face in our world today.
Not only survived, but
they have transcended.
They've learned a way
of living and a way
of being where the
challenges, such as climate
change, such as nuclear war,
such as pandemic disease,
are no longer a threat
to their society.
So clearly, we have not yet
reached this posthuman stage.
And this is what's important
in the algorithms and the paper
that we're going to
develop, because one
of the possibilities
is that we do, in fact,
reach this posthuman stage.
So let's take a look at the
three possible scenarios.
And then let's run through
the algorithm itself
that explores and gives
weight and value to each one,
and see which one
of these scenarios
is most likely
true for us today.
The first possibility
that Bostrom defines
is that advanced civilizations
become extinct before they
reach the posthuman stage.
In other words, they succumb
to the crises of their time.
Maybe they don't survive
the climate change.
Maybe something
happens, and there's
a pandemic disease
that wipes out
all life on the
face of the Earth.
Maybe there's a solar flare.
Maybe an asteroid
hits the Earth.
Maybe there is a great war.
Many of these
ideas are precisely
the things that are
being played out
in the films and the movies
that are most popular today.
And I think it's interesting
that Bostrom has defined
this possibility as the
first one in the algorithm
that he is developing.
So this first scenario is that
advanced civilizations simply
go extinct before they solve
the problems of their time.
The second possibility
fascinates me,
because it suggests that
advanced civilizations do
reach the posthuman stage.
They do reach the
point where they
have transcended all of
the great challenges that
face us in the world today.
However, they become
a non-technologically
based society.
In other words, they go back
to living closer to the Earth.
They become more of an
agrarian society, where
life is based around growing
food, small populations,
localized living, so localized
economies, localized sources
of energy, local communities.
And this certainly is a
possibility for the future.
We may find eventually that
localized living serves
us better in a changing
world than large scale,
centralized types of
civilizations that
seem to have
developed in the past
and that we are actually
living in right now.
So this second possibility
that I find so fascinating
is that we do survive,
but we choose a very, very
different way of living.
The third possibility is
that advanced civilization
do reach the posthuman stage.
However, they continue
to develop along
a technological path.
So in other words,
advanced civilizations
learn to reconcile their
relationship to the Earth.
They learn to find balance
and harmony with nature.
and harmony with other humans.
In this civilization,
war becomes obsolete.
The advanced
civilizations learned
that no one wins in a war.
The idea of a war is that
there are winners and losers.
The kinds of wars
that become possible
through advanced
technology, everyone loses.
So in this third scenario,
advanced civilizations
reach the posthuman stage,
transcend the great challenges
that we face in our
world today, and they
continue to develop as
a technological society.
This means they continue
to build computers
with even more advanced
capabilities based
upon principles that we're only
beginning to understand today--
quantum computing, for
example, where memory
of the computer and the
capacity is actually stored
beyond the machine itself.
The memory is not confined
to the circuits or a chip.
It is stored in a
field of energy that is
larger than the machine itself.
So what Bostrom is
saying in the paper
is that these are the three
scenarios that are possible.
One of these three must be true.
And now, he's going to use a
very sophisticated algorithm,
and I'm going to share
this with you, that
will help him to know
which of those three
is most likely for us right
now in our lives today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So the core of the simulation
argument that Bostrom uses--
it's a complex calculation.
And it uses a
series of variables
that represent each of
the three possibilities
that I've just shared with
you and all of the parameters
that go into making
those variables possible.
So let me just identify
the variables first.
On your screen,
you're seeing an fp.
That is the fraction
of civilizations
that survives to posthuman.
Now, when Bostrom is
creating these calculations,
he's talking about
civilizations in general,
not specifically ours,
any civilizations.
He hasn't even really talked
about where they are located.
He's just saying, in general,
advanced civilizations
will follow one of these
three possibilities.
And fp is representing the
fraction of civilizations
that survive to posthuman.
OK.
The second variable
is a bar N, N
with a bar over the top of it.
It is the average number of
simulations run by a posthuman
civilization.
So what he's saying here is
that if there is a posthuman
civilization, that they
have reached that point,
they are technological, they
are running these simulations,
how many of the simulations
are they running?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The third variable is bar
H. Capital H with a bar
over the top is the average
number of individuals
that have lived
in a civilization
before it reaches posthuman.
So these three variables are all
brought together in a formula
that you're seeing on
the screen right now.
This is the formula
that represents
the algorithm of thinking.
We're calculating
what possibilities
are probable for us
in our lifetime today.
All right.
And as the variables begin
to shift, what we see
is that some of
the possibilities
become more likely than others.
So the f sim that you see
on the left hand side,
this is the number
of civilizations that
match the criteria that
are being developed
by the mathematic
algorithm on the right.
So the thinking that
underlies this argument
is that a technologically
mature posthuman civilization--
number one, it would have
enormous computing power.
And this is why I made the point
in the first episode of this
series that after only 60
to 70 years of developing
the computer technology
that we have today,
we are creating simulations that
are so real that we cannot tell
them from the real thing unless
we know it's a simulation.
So this argument,
the underlying theme,
is that a mature posthuman
civilization that
has continued along
a technological path
is going to have awesome,
enormous computing power, where
bar N, the capital
N with a bar over it
is going to be very
large in the algorithm.
The calculations are
revealing three possibilities.
And each one has a value
between zero and one.
So the closer the
value is to one,
the greater the possibility
is that it is true.
Closer it is the zero,
the less that possibility.
Intuitively, that's
what we can say.
So let's take a look at
these three possibilities.
First possibility is that
the fraction of human level
civilizations that reach
a posthuman stage that
survive all of the
crises that we see today,
and maybe some that we
haven't even witnessed yet,
the possibility is
very close to zero.
All right.
The second possibility
is that the fraction
of posthuman
civilizations that are
even interested in
running civilizations
is very close to zero.
So this is aligned with the
agrarian type of society
that we mentioned earlier--
the fraction of
posthuman civilizations
that survive the
challenges, but they choose
a different way of living.
The third possibility
is that the fraction
of all people with our
kind of experience,
our kind of history,
our kind of knowledge,
what we know today, that are
now living in a simulation
is very close to one.
Let me say this again.
It says the fraction of all
people who know what we now
know today, have experienced
what we have experienced
in our past, collectively--
that the fraction of those
that are now already living
in a simulation is
very close to one.
All right.
So with these three
probabilities in mind,
what we now know,
the algorithm seems
to favor the third possibility.
It's closer to one
than the other two are.
This says that advanced
civilizations survive
to posthuman, and they
continue to use these advanced
technological practices
that we are using today.
So if this is true,
what Bostrom says
is that we are almost certainly
living in a computer simulation
right now.
Let me say this again.
If number three is true, then
what Bostrom's calculations are
saying, what his
algorithm is suggesting,
is that we are already living
in a computer simulation
right now.
We have reached posthuman.
We continued a
technological path.
We continued to
build simulations,
and that we have created
a simulation for ourselves
right now.
Now, I'm not talking about who
or why or what the purpose.
That's where we're
going to go with this.
But I want you to see that
the scientific examination
of whether or not this
possibility could even be real
is telling us that it
is more likely than not
that you and I are living
in a simulated universe,
a simulated world, a
virtual reality, right now.
It suggests that we're
not even really here.
Our bodies are here.
And we're experiencing
through these bodies.
But as you're going
to see, it suggests
that we may actually be
projecting into these bodies
from somewhere else.
And the implications of that
are vast and powerful and
beautiful.
And I'm excited to
share them with you.
This idea, Bostrom's
conclusion--
he says, unless we're already
living inside of a simulation,
unless we're already here, he
says possibility one or two
has already happened.
Unless we're already
in the simulation,
either we didn't make it,
number one, or we did make it,
and we became agrarian
society, number two.
So the odds are greater than
not that we are actually
living in this simulation.
And I want you to know
this is more than just
a philosophical
question, because it
touches upon the deepest
aspects of our society,
of our belief system, of
the way we think about
our origin, our
relationship to the world,
our purpose, our function how
we think about one another.
And now that Bostrom has done
this groundbreaking work,
it's like the floodgates
have been opened.
And everybody is now piling in.
Some very, very
well-known scientists
are now agreeing with Bostrom.
Physicist Neil deGrasse
Tyson, for example.
This is a direct quote.
He says I think the
likelihood that we
are living in a simulated
reality may be very high.
He says the odds,
from his perspective,
are 50-50 that our entire
existence is a program
on someone else's hard drive.
All right.
Now, I don't necessarily
think that we're
experiencing on a hard drive.
I think it's a
kind of simulation
that we are only beginning to
understand on a quantum level
the size of the universe.
But Tyson is saying
that this probability--
it's more than 50-50 that
we're living on this.
Elon Musk, the futurist, the
inventor, the entrepreneur--
he agrees.
And in a fascinating
conversation
that he had during a
question and answer
at a recent conference, he
shared his personal thoughts
about this.
And I want to share with
you what Elon Musk said.
He was at a conference
that's called the Recode Code
Conference, 2016.
And there was an informal Q&A
at the end of the conference.
He was on the stage, and
someone in the audience
asked him a question.
And the question centered
around this possibility--
are we living in a
simulated reality?
And Elon Musk said
that this very question
has been at the core of
nearly every conversation
that he has had with his
staff, with the scientist,
with the engineers, with
the technologists that
work with him developing
future technologies.
>>ELON MUSK: So given that
we're clearly on a trajectory
to have games that are
indistinguishable from reality,
and those games could be
played on any set-top box
or on a PC or whatever,
and there would probably
be billions of such
computers or set-top boxes,
it would seem to follow that the
odds that we're in base reality
is one in billions.
Tell me what's wrong
with that argument.
>>AUDIENCE: Is the answer yes?
>>MUSK: The argument
is probably.
Is there a flaw
in that argument?
>>AUDIENCE: But someone--
>>MUSK: I'm not sure
what the error--
>>AUDIENCE: No, no.
The argument makes sense.
So the assumption then is
that somebody beat us to it.
And this is a game.
>>MUSK: No, no.
There's a one in billions chance
that this is base reality.
>>AUDIENCE: Oh, OK.
What do you think?
>>MUSK: Well, I think
it's one in billions.
>>AUDIENCE: OK.
>>MUSK: That seems to be
clearly what it would suggest.
And actually, I
mean, arguably, we
should hope that that's
true, because otherwise,
if civilization
stops advancing, then
that may be due to some
calamitous event that
erases civilization.
So maybe we should be hopeful
that this is a simulation,
because otherwise--
>>WALT MOSSBERG: Because
they could reboot it.
>>MUSK: Well,
otherwise, either we're
going to create
simulations that are
indistinguishable from
reality, or civilization
will cease to exist.
Those are the two options.
>>GREGG: In other words, he's
saying there's a billion to one
chance that this
is the real world.
The odds are so stacked in favor
of us living a digital reality,
a simulation, a virtual reality
now that we have the technology
to even know what that means.
So I'm sharing this
with you because we
have very quickly
since 2001 gone
from the first scientific
investigation-- is it possible?
Nick Bostrom developed
the algorithm.
He published the paper.
And that paper has been read
and reread and circulated
among scientific circles, peer
reviewed scientific circles,
and has now become
the foundation
for many other people,
from their perspectives,
asking the question,
contributing their expertise.
It's opened the door to
a new and empowering way
of us thinking about
ourselves and our relationship
to the world.
So now that you know that the
scientific investigation has
already begun, what I'd
like to do is talk to you
a little bit about what
these findings mean.
And for the rest of
this series, we're
going to delve into how such
a simulation is possible,
how does it work,
how does it play out
in our lives and
our relationships,
in the healing of our
bodies, in the times of war
and in times of peace.
Are all of these experiences
that we're having, are they
actually following
patterns that are
the hallmark of a simulation?
I'll tell you right
now, the answer is yes.
But when you see how closely
our real world is tracking
the properties of
a simulation, it
leads us to think of
ourselves and our relationship
to the world in a
very different way.
So how do we make sense of
what these algorithms are
telling us?
How do we make sense of
Bostrom's conclusions?
What I'd like to do for
the next few moments
is, let's compare what the
possibility of a simulation
in our world looks like
within the context of what
science is already telling
us about the world.
Science tells us, for
example, that the universe
began with a
beginning, a big bang,
a primal release of energy
that began an expansion that
continues to this moment.
The universe continues
to expand right now.
In simulation theory, this
would equate to the moment
the simulation began.
A simulation has to
have a place where
someone pushes the button,
and the patterns begin.
The patterns are spun out by a
mathematic algorithm that looks
to us like a release of energy.
Our release of energy
is based upon atoms,
molecules, elements.
Those are the creation of
what we are now seeing.
When we simulate these
things with our own software,
we can actually create
and mimic these functions.
I recently had the
opportunity to tour
the CERN superconducting
super collider in Geneva,
Switzerland, where scientists
are doing precisely this.
They are recreating the moment
that the universe began.
They're recreating the
big bang, because they
want to see what happened in the
first few fractions of a second
after that primal
release of energy
occurred that laid the
foundation of the properties
and the principles that we know
as the physics of the universe
today.
Well, in simulation theory, this
is precisely what would happen.
It's in those first few
fractions of a second
when the simulation begins that
the properties are established
that run that simulation.
The field of energy that
connects all things that we now
know exist, that field is
the container for all things.
So in the beginning
of our simulation,
there was a primal release
of energy, a field of energy
was formed, and we continue
to live and experience
within that field.
You can think of the
field in this way.
The field is the
container for all things
that we know and experience.
Nothing to us exists beyond
the container, number one.
Number two, the
field is the bridge
between our inner
and our outer world.
We are constantly communicating
with this field of energy
through an energy that
we create in our bodies.
And we're going to explore
that later in the series.
Number three, the
field of energy
created at the moment of our
simulation when it began--
or if you'd like to think
of it as the big bang--
that field of energy is a mirror
in the outer world reflecting
what we are creating through our
thoughts, feelings, emotions,
beliefs, channeled through
the nervous system and the DNA
of our biological experience.
So when we talk
about the simulation,
based upon what we now know,
what science is telling us,
the properties of that
field became what we today
know as the laws of
physics, the laws that
govern all matter, including
our bodies and our lives.
So with these ideas
in mind, we're
developing a new vocabulary.
It's a new way to
think about your life.
think about your world.
With these ideas in
mind, the key is this--
for us to master this virtual
reality, this simulation
that we find
ourselves in, we must
master the relationships--
the laws are showing
to us, the laws of physics.
And this is where science and
spirituality come together.
They blend in a really beautiful
and a very powerful way.
Because as we understand
the laws of physics,
and we apply those
laws to what our most
cherished and ancient
spiritual traditions
have told us for
over 5,000 years,
a new possibility unfolds.
So I'm going to invite you
to think about it like this.
Within this field of energy,
we exist, encapsulated
in a reality that we know
is our everyday world.
We communicate with one another.
We have these physical
bodies that we
sense our world through.
We can eat chocolate
with these bodies.
We can see rainbows
We can hold one another
with these bodies in the way
that we could not do if we
were simply energetic beings.
This is the value of being in
these physical bodies, to have
sensual experiences and to be
able to master what those mean.
However, within this
experience based
upon this principle
of the simulation
and the way we're
thinking about our world,
we also exist in another world
beyond this immediate reality.
We exist in a world
outside of the simulation.
So when you close your eyes,
and you take that deep breath,
and you go within and you
connect with yourself--
what you would call your higher
self or that little voice that
you connect with for intuition
to answer the questions
and give you direction
and guidance--
within the context of our
simulation, what we're actually
doing is communicating
with ourselves
outside of the simulation,
the part of ourselves
that has agreed, beyond
our immediate experience,
to guide and
supervise us while we
are in this simulation
learning something.
When we communicate with
a higher power, when
we communicate with God, and
we communicate with angels,
within the context of this
conversation, what we are
actually doing is moving our
awareness beyond the simulation
itself back into what is
called the base reality
or the original environment.
We mentioned this
earlier because I
wanted to establish
this foundation so
that we can tie into it as we
go throughout this program.
This opens up the door to
all kinds of possibilities.
Think about what this means.
Think about what this
means to you and me.
We are in here, but
we're also out there.
We are one and the same.
One of the things that
I really, really love
about the idea of
the simulation--
we've all heard that
life is eternal.
Maybe not these bodies, but
that our soul or our spirit
is eternal and
never really dies.
If this simulation
theory is correct,
it means that when
we no longer exist
within this simulated
environment,
we continue to exist beyond
this simulated environment.
We are out there,
projecting ourselves in here
to have an experience so
that we can learn and master
the laws of our simulation--
the laws of physics,
the laws of motion, the
laws of thermodynamics,
the laws of equal and
opposite force, all the laws
that we know of physics.
We're here exploring what those
mean, because it's possible
that we're going to need
to have those laws mastered
when we go to whatever world
it is we're going to next.
But it also suggests that
when we die in this world,
no matter how
horrible the death,
that it is just our simulated
existence that has passed away.
The essence continues
and lives on.
And we've all heard this.
We've all heard this in
religious traditions.
We've heard it with
our loved ones.
I was present just before my
grandfather left this world.
And one of the most
powerful things that I saw
was my grandfather.
He was lying in a hospital bed.
And he was already
between the worlds.
He was in an altered state.
And as he was passing, his arms
reached out in front of him
like this.
And he was making this gesture,
trying to hold someone,
and he had this huge
smile on his face.
And it was like he was
reaching for people
that were coming toward him.
And it touched me so
deeply, so powerfully,
to see that in that moment.
To me, it was a reassurance
that there is really
something else out there.
I sense that within myself.
But to see that reality with
a close relative, and someone
I love actually making
that transition,
is very powerful for me.
So all of these
ideas, we're going
to continue to explore
these and how they work.
I'm just-- with
broad brush strokes,
I'm laying out
the possibilities.
If we begin to think of
our lives and our world
in terms of a simulation,
it changes the way
that we view our
lives and our world.
It's the modern language for a
very ancient way of thinking.
It's the contemporary
language of science
for a very ancient
way of thinking
that's been relegated to
spirituality and mysticism
and religion.
So for now, based upon
Bostrom's paper and the thinking
of people like Elon Musk,
Neil deGrasse Tyson,
and a growing list of
mainstream scientists,
let's assume for the
rest of this series
that we are, in fact, living
in a simulated reality.
Let's assume that this is true.
And it opens the door
then to the next question
that allows us to explore
the question of why.
Why would we be living
in a simulation?
What would be the purpose?
What could we gain from
such an experience?
Well, as it is with
any simulation,
we can assume that we're
here to master something.
Now, we need to understand
what that might be.
I mentioned earlier
in the series
that there is a growing
body of scientific evidence
suggesting that consciousness
communicates with itself
constantly, that we
are informing ourselves
through our creations, through
our art, through our music,
through our books, and
through our movies.
With this idea in mind, when
we think about a simulation,
what could be the purpose
of our simulation?
Well, maybe the theme of our
creations gives us a clue.
Almost universally,
the films that
are the most popular today,
the blockbuster films,
they are illustrating
possible futures of breakdown,
of collapse, of war and disease.
Is it possible that
we are actually
living an advanced
civilization where
we are learning the great
lessons that consciousness
is informing us of?
Have we experienced a great war
that has destroyed our world?
Have we experienced
a pandemic disease
that has wiped out much of
the life on this planet?
Have we depleted the resources?
Has climate change
destroyed the world
that we've known in the past?
Are we living in a
simulation to learn
a way of being
because we need to,
because we need to find a new
world and a new way of living?
All of these possibilities
now become something very real
and perhaps probable
based upon the algorithms
and the mathematics that suggest
we're already in a simulation.
Maybe we're here because
we need to be here,
because we need to
learn about ourselves
and a new way of being.
This idea of us
living in a simulation
was actually an idea
that was put forward
by a Chinese emperor long ago.
His name was Master Zhuang.
And what he said at that time
in a nonscientific manner echoes
precisely the ideas that
we're talking about here.
And I'd just like to share
his statement with you.
Listen to this, how
beautiful it is.
He said that the
emperor dreamed that he
was a butterfly dreaming
he was an emperor.
This is an illustration
of a way of thinking.
He dreamed that he was one
thing and within that one thing
that he was something else.
He was moving from one
reality to another to another.
Now that scientific
investigations tell us
that it's more likely
than not that we
are living in a
computer simulation,
the question becomes, why?
What are we learning?
What do we gain from
such an experience?
Well, to answer
these questions means
that we must reveal the deepest
truth of humankind's most
ancient secret.
It's the ability to
awaken within each of us
the mystical potential
in the physical world.
And in our next episode,
we'll do just that.
I want to thank you
for joining me today.
And be sure to tune
in for our next
all new episode of
"Missing Links," Simulation
by Design, Are We Living
in a Virtual Reality?
[THEME MUSIC]